# Project-bike-sharing-rental
In this project, a neural network is built to carry out prediction problem on a real dataset for bike sharing problem over two years of period.

## Introduction
In this project, you'll get to build a neural network from scratch to carry out a prediction problem on a real dataset! By building a neural network from the ground up, you'll have a much better understanding of gradient descent, backpropagation, and other concepts that are important to know before we move to higher level tools such as PyTorch. You'll also get to see how to apply these networks to solve real prediction problems!
The data comes from the UCI Machine Learning Database [here](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Bike+Sharing+Dataset).

## Topics
In this project, we cover several areas:
* Machine learning
* Deep learning
* Feedforward neural networks
* backward propagation
* Activation functions
* Hyper-parameters tuning
* Pytorch




## Background 


Bike sharing systems are new generation of traditional bike rentals where whole process from membership, rental and return 
back has become automatic. Through these systems, user is able to easily rent a bike from a particular position and return 
back at another position. Currently, there are about over 500 bike-sharing programs around the world which is composed of 
over 500 thousands bicycles. Today, there exists great interest in these systems due to their important role in traffic, 
environmental and health issues. 

Apart from interesting real world applications of bike sharing systems, the characteristics of data being generated by
these systems make them attractive for the research. Opposed to other transport services such as bus or subway, the duration
of travel, departure and arrival position is explicitly recorded in these systems. This feature turns bike sharing system into
a virtual sensor network that can be used for sensing mobility in the city. Hence, it is expected that most of important
events in the city could be detected via monitoring these data.


## Data Set

Bike-sharing rental process is highly correlated to the environmental and seasonal settings. For instance, weather conditions,
precipitation, day of week, season, hour of the day, etc. can affect the rental behaviors. The core data set is related to  
the two-year historical log corresponding to years 2011 and 2012 from Capital Bikeshare system, Washington D.C., USA which is 
publicly available in http://capitalbikeshare.com/system-data. We aggregated the data on two hourly and daily basis and then 
extracted and added the corresponding weather and seasonal information. Weather information are extracted from http://www.freemeteo.com. 


## Associated tasks


	- Regression: 
		Predication of bike rental count hourly or daily based on the environmental and seasonal settings.
	
	- Event and Anomaly Detection:  
		Count of rented bikes are also correlated to some events in the town which easily are traceable via search engines.
		For instance, query like "2012-10-30 washington d.c." in Google returns related results to Hurricane Sandy. Some of the important events are 
		identified in [1]. Therefore the data can be used for validation of anomaly or event detection algorithms as well.



## Files


	- Readme.txt
	- hour.csv : bike sharing counts aggregated on hourly basis. Records: 17379 hours
	- day.csv - bike sharing counts aggregated on daily basis. Records: 731 days

	

## Dataset characteristics
	
Both hour.csv and day.csv have the following fields, except hr which is not available in day.csv
	
	- instant: record index
	- dteday : date
	- season : season (1:springer, 2:summer, 3:fall, 4:winter)
	- yr : year (0: 2011, 1:2012)
	- mnth : month ( 1 to 12)
	- hr : hour (0 to 23)
	- holiday : weather day is holiday or not (extracted from http://dchr.dc.gov/page/holiday-schedule)
	- weekday : day of the week
	- workingday : if day is neither weekend nor holiday is 1, otherwise is 0.
	+ weathersit : 
		- 1: Clear, Few clouds, Partly cloudy, Partly cloudy
		- 2: Mist + Cloudy, Mist + Broken clouds, Mist + Few clouds, Mist
		- 3: Light Snow, Light Rain + Thunderstorm + Scattered clouds, Light Rain + Scattered clouds
		- 4: Heavy Rain + Ice Pallets + Thunderstorm + Mist, Snow + Fog
	- temp : Normalized temperature in Celsius. The values are divided to 41 (max)
	- atemp: Normalized feeling temperature in Celsius. The values are divided to 50 (max)
	- hum: Normalized humidity. The values are divided to 100 (max)
	- windspeed: Normalized wind speed. The values are divided to 67 (max)
	- casual: count of casual users
	- registered: count of registered users
	- cnt: count of total rental bikes including both casual and registered
	

## License

Use of this dataset in publications must be cited to the following publication:

[1] Fanaee-T, Hadi, and Gama, Joao, "Event labeling combining ensemble detectors and background knowledge", Progress in Artificial Intelligence (2013): pp. 1-15, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, doi:10.1007/s13748-013-0040-3.

@article{
	year={2013},
	issn={2192-6352},
	journal={Progress in Artificial Intelligence},
	doi={10.1007/s13748-013-0040-3},
	title={Event labeling combining ensemble detectors and background knowledge},
	url={http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13748-013-0040-3},
	publisher={Springer Berlin Heidelberg},
	keywords={Event labeling; Event detection; Ensemble learning; Background knowledge},
	author={Fanaee-T, Hadi and Gama, Joao},
	pages={1-15}
}

## Configure and Manage Your Environment with Anaconda

Per the Anaconda [docs](http://conda.pydata.org/docs):

> Conda is an open source package management system and environment management system 
for installing multiple versions of software packages and their dependencies and 
switching easily between them. It works on Linux, OS X and Windows, and was created 
for Python programs but can package and distribute any software.

## Overview
Using Anaconda consists of the following:

1. Install [`miniconda`](http://conda.pydata.org/miniconda.html) on your computer, by selecting the latest Python version for your operating system. If you already have `conda` or `miniconda` installed, you should be able to skip this step and move on to step 2.
2. Create and activate * a new `conda` [environment](http://conda.pydata.org/docs/using/envs.html).

\* Each time you wish to work on any exercises, activate your `conda` environment!

---

## 1. Installation

**Download** the latest version of `miniconda` that matches your system.

|        | Linux | Mac | Windows | 
|--------|-------|-----|---------|
| 64-bit | [64-bit (bash installer)][lin64] | [64-bit (bash installer)][mac64] | [64-bit (exe installer)][win64]
| 32-bit | [32-bit (bash installer)][lin32] |  | [32-bit (exe installer)][win32]

[win64]: https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Windows-x86_64.exe
[win32]: https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Windows-x86.exe
[mac64]: https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh
[lin64]: https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
[lin32]: https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86.sh

**Install** [miniconda](http://conda.pydata.org/miniconda.html) on your machine. Detailed instructions:

- **Linux:** http://conda.pydata.org/docs/install/quick.html#linux-miniconda-install
- **Mac:** http://conda.pydata.org/docs/install/quick.html#os-x-miniconda-install
- **Windows:** http://conda.pydata.org/docs/install/quick.html#windows-miniconda-install

## 2. Create and Activate the Environment

For Windows users, these following commands need to be executed from the **Anaconda prompt** as opposed to a Windows terminal window. For Mac, a normal terminal window will work. 

#### Git and version control
These instructions also assume you have `git` installed for working with Github from a terminal window, but if you do not, you can download that first with the command:
```
conda install git
```

If you'd like to learn more about version control and using `git` from the command line, take a look at our [free course: Version Control with Git](https://www.udacity.com/course/version-control-with-git--ud123).

**Now, we're ready to create our local environment!**

1. Clone the repository, and navigate to the downloaded folder. This may take a minute or two to clone due to the included image data.
```
git clone https://github.com/thomasxmeng/Project-bike-sharing-rental.git
cd Project-bike-sharing-rental
```

2. Create (and activate) a new environment, named `deep-learning` with Python 3.6. If prompted to proceed with the install `(Proceed [y]/n)` type y.

	- __Linux__ or __Mac__: 
	```
	conda create -n deep-learning python=3.6
	source activate deep-learning
	```
	- __Windows__: 
	```
	conda create --name deep-learning python=3.6
	activate deep-learning
	```
	
	At this point your command line should look something like: `(deep-learning) <User>:Project-bike-sharing-rental <user>$`. The `(deep-learning)` indicates that your environment has been activated, and you can proceed with further package installations.

3. Install PyTorch and torchvision; this should install the latest version of PyTorch.
	
	- __Linux__ or __Mac__: 
	```
	conda install pytorch torchvision -c pytorch 
	```
	- __Windows__: 
	```
	conda install pytorch -c pytorch
	pip install torchvision
	```

6. Install a few required pip packages, which are specified in the requirements text file (including OpenCV).
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

7. That's it!

Now most of the `deep-learning` libraries are available to you. Very occasionally, you will see a repository with an addition requirements file, which exists should you want to use TensorFlow and Keras, for example. In this case, you're encouraged to install another library to your existing environment, or create a new environment for a specific project. 

Noe, assuming your `deep-learning` environment is still activated, you can navigate to the main repo and start looking at the notebooks:

```
cd
cd Project-bike-sharing-rental
jupyter notebook
```
8. In your browser, open `Predicting_bike_sharing_data.ipynb`. Note that in the previous workspace this was called `Your_first_neural_network.ipynb` but the contents are the same, this is just a descriptive difference.
Follow the instructions in the notebook; they will lead you through the project. 

9. To exit the environment when you have completed your work session, simply close the terminal window.


